Your name is? Please tell me your name. My name?
Romulo, Romulo Munguia Torres. And where were you
born? In Guadalajara.
In Guadalajara? In what year? In 1885. Well,
during
these days in the past,
tell me about your life when you were young in
Guadalajara. It took me about ten years.
My mother had nine children.
I was the second of the men, but I was the fifth in the
family. Los anteriores murieron y fueron dos, y
hubo dos mujeres. De manera que yo fui el quinto de
la familia.
Entonces, empezamos a luchar de una manera muy
violenta, dado que mi padre, He was persecuted by
the government of General Díaz. He died because of
the persecution of General Díaz. My father was a
supporter of General Ramón Corona. He was the
governor of the state. He pacified the whole
region. In what year did his father die? How old was
I? I was 95. I was about 10 years old. My mother
stayed in front of the family, and two older
sisters were the ones who were working, being old
ladies, to support us. I sweep the streets because
at that time the owners of the houses had to sweep
the streets every day. I sweep the streets in some
houses to earn a few cents and help my sisters or
help with some cents that they gave me also because
I helped mass in a church. Con eso nos fuimos
formando. Hasta que una de mis hermanas se casó. Se
fue a México. Y entonces me llevó junto con otra
hermana, la más chica. Y allí en México fue donde
empecé prácticamente a maquiar. Allí entré de
aprendiz. en una imprenta que se llamó American
Book and Printing Company, que hacía todo el
trabajo de los ferrocarriles en aquella época. De
ahí fui progresando hasta que llegué a ser jefe del
departamento recreativo. Entonces, There I met
Mr. Ernesto Chiavero, who founded the first
magazine for the place, an illustrated magazine
called Arte y Letras. I sympathized with him, and
then he put on his apron and took me there as her
boss. There I was working until the newspaper, El
Diario, was founded to compete with El Impartial,
which was the main newspaper in Mexico. And then,
in El Diario, I became the head of the workshops.
From there, practically, The social
struggle began to explode. I established the
National Labor Chamber in Mexico
in 1910.
With that, the social struggle began. that was
associated with the revolution. And
to the triumph of Madero, they recognized us and we
started to work. The Department of Labor was
established by Don Francisco León de la Barra and
we solved the first strike that took place. So they
started working in accordance with the capital
and the work. But after two or three years, Morones
and other individuals came to defend themselves.
We could now call them communists. And the fight
between them and us began. Then, after Madero
fell, we withdrew from the fight and the
Moronistas
stayed, right? They started to establish trade
unions and to exploit the workers, inciting them
to strike and fight. So then, the social struggle
in Mexico was bifurcated. I, with the part... the
part... How could we call it? Moderate,
if you want. And Morones with the radical part. So,
the fall of Madero came, and even Obregón came. And
Jorones accompanied him with Obregón and the
social struggle began. We could say that. And I,
well, I incorporated myself from the opposite
side to the death of Madero, who was already Don
Venustiano Carranza, So I became a member of Don
Venustiano. And since then I started my
revolutionary
struggle in Mexico. Then came the separation
between Villa and Don Venustiano. Don Venustiano
left Mexico and went to Veracruz. And I was in
Puebla, always with Macabrasismo, and I
established a newspaper called
Nueva Patria. That newspaper was to take the
workers down a path of reconciliation between
capital and work. Tomando como tema principal
para poderles meter en la cabeza a los
trabajadores cuál era nuestro papel, adopté como
ejemplo el desarrollo de una empresa de
ferrocarril.
Les empecé a demostrar que el capital y el trabajo
debían de caminar como se construyen los rieles de
una. for a railway. That if one deviates from the
other due to little deviation, the society in
general, which in this case simulated the machine
for the cars, would deviate. And that was the
danger of the clothes fight. se descargaría la
sociedad y entonces tendríamos que ir al fracaso.
Pero como luego vino el asesinato de... Entonces,
cuando me metieron en México,
me mandaron a Yucatán. and in Yucatán we
established a newspaper, the newspaper was
called Demócrata. From Mérida I went to San Juan
Bautista, in Tabasco, and I also established the
Demócrata. And once the social campaign was
established in these two regions, I was ordered to
go to Tapachula, in Chiapas, on the border of
Guatemala. But in San Juan Bautista, I got a very
strong paludism, and then I was ordered to go back
to Mexico. I re-concentrated in Mexico with the
column of General Don Pablo González. And Don
Pablo... The general of Cabanza? Yes. So Don Pablo
sent me to Puebla to establish also the labor
campaign in favor of of the moderate movement.
And I established there the immense unions of
workers. I established the newspaper, which was
also called El Demócrata. And already in Puebla
came the electoral struggle Y se nombró el
Congreso Constituyente, Congreso de Querétaro.
Y en el congreso, en este congreso, fui yo
representante por el distrito de Camachaco, del
Estado de Ecuador. Ya, ya, entonces, Se siguió la
lucha entre Obregón y Carranza hasta llegar al
asesinato de Don Balistiano. Asesinado Don
Balistiano, Don Pablo, que era mi jefe de hija,
tuvo que venir a los Estados Unidos. And they
started chasing us, the demonists. And that's
when I had to leave Mexico to come here to the United
States. In 1926. Since then, I've been here. I
couldn't return to Mexico until General Cardenas
But I didn't want to go because I already
have my family, I already
have my children here. For a few years, it was no
longer worth it to move them to go to the
revolution. Here I came and I started working with
Ignacio Lozano in the press. And after three
months of being here, he made me head of the press,
the superintendent
of the press. After a few years, after three or four
or five years, I had a discussion with the father of
Enrique González, who was the president of the
press. And Don Ignacio was in Los Angeles. And
there I told Don Ignacio to take me away from the
press. And I took him away. I stayed on the street
with three or four children to fight. And I started
working with a small press. From there, step by
step, we have
come to this. That has been, in general terms, what
I have been able to do. To educate my children, that
they are grateful to this country, that it
received them from childhood. They have occupied
and played a very important role. And during the
war, they have united as warriors. Without losing
their love for Mexico, but always their loyalty to
the country that educated them. That's how we are.
Formado esta pequeña familia.
¿Y toda su familia vivía ahora en San Antonio?
Pues, el mayor está en Detroit. Allá tiene un
taller de imprenta. Es presidente de la sociedad
de oficiales. the retired chiefs and officers,
because he spent 23 years in the army, and he left as
lieutenant colonel. He retired and has a full job,
and he continues to work as... he is in his
services, in what is necessary in the army, of
course. El otro segundo es este, Rubén. Este nada
más sirvió su periodo y se vino conmigo. Y ha sido el
que conmigo ha levantado el negocio. El turcero
Guillermo está en Randolph Hill. No, Lackland
Hill. They are also retired. She just retired. She
was an assistant to the general and chief of all
the air forces in the
Pacific. Well, then... So, where are we now?
Yes. Well,
we established
a society for teaching
Spanish, right? Yes. And we
created a... My daughter, my granddaughter. Nice
to meet you. Nice to meet you too. My daughter is
from a university. Nice to meet you. Nice to meet
you. Thank you.
Yes, yes.
Tiene su historia. Como le dije a usted, cuando nos
tuvimos que venir a los Estados Unidos, entré a
trabajar a la prensa. Y allí me hice ese mal
bendijo. A los tres meses, me nombró jefe de los
talleres Don Nacho Lozano. Durante todo ese
tiempo, pues, Estuve trabajando bien, pero llegó
el momento en el que Don Ignacio fundó en Los
Ángeles el periódico La Opinión. Y entonces, él se
fue a vigilar allá. El papá de Enrique González,
Don Leonides, quedó al frente del negocio de la
prensa. But because of Angas or Marangas, as we say
in Spanish,
there was a disagreement between him and me, and I
had to separate. So a real calvary began for me.
Because my wife had to do the laundry. And the boys,
Rafael and Rubén, who were already grown up,
started selling a magazine called Liberty. And
for every copy they sold, they gave them a coupon.
Con el tiempo, llegaron a juntar una cantidad de
copones y entré en el catálogo que les daban de
premios a cambio de copones. Estaba una precita
que cuando la vimos en el catálogo, me preguntaron
los muchachos, papá, ¿quieres que pedamos esta
precita? Sí, hijo, pídanla. Y pidieron la prensa y
la tenían como juguete. Yo estaba trabajando.
Pero vino el disgusto y me tuve que separar. Y
entonces mi señora fundó un programa de radio que
se llamó La Hora Estrella.
Pero los comerciantes, In spite of the program,
they began to ask that there be a male announcer,
that it wasn't all announced by my wife. And then I
asked for permission from Don Leonides to allow me
to go out at 3 in the afternoon to help my wife. The
program was from three to four. But we were in that
when the displeasure
came. And then we stayed. My wife had to be washed.
And at that time there were factories where they
cleaned nuts. And we also started to march, in
short, as humbly as we could. And one night, when we
didn't have anything to feed the creatures, like
at 11 o'clock at night, my wife and I were sad to see
that the boys had been taken to bed sin cenar, sin
comer. Y me quedé viendo la fresita. Entonces le
dije a mi señora, oye, después de todo, ¿por qué nos
quedamos? Desde mañana tengo mi imprenta.
Entonces me dice, ¿pero qué estás loco? ¿Con qué?
Le digo, mira, That's going to be our salvation.
That's going to be our imprint. No, you're crazy.
We're going to sleep. The next day, very early, I
went to see this man. What was his name? He was the
agent of the Dillinger mills in New Brompton. here
in San Antonio. And I told him, man, he was the
announcer of the radio program of my lady. I told
him, man, why don't we make a combination? To
announce the flour, let's make some coupons. And
those coupons, you give them to the merchants so
that they give them to the consumers of the flour.
He said,
man, it's good. So we started to make up to 10,000
popcorns. We did it on the square. The boys,
instead of leaving school, and instead of going
out with their friends, they came to help me with
the machine. Well, that's how God did it. From this
machine, we bought another one. a bigger one, and a
bigger one, and a second-hand one, all broken, in
short. We kept raising them until they reached
you. So
this is the basis of Mugia Principa.
And this has drawn a lot of attention, this
principle, right? They have been published on
several occasions. In typography exhibitions in
the schools, they come in the front.
Ah, este es un artículo sobre usted. Sí. Sí? Ah, qué
interesante.
Is it possible for me to read this on the tape,
please? Yes. To make a copy. Toy Presley to
Prosperity by J.H. Pling, staff writer. Sit down.
San Antonio Express, Sunday, September 30, 1951.
One of the West Side's leading citizens is not a
citizen. That seeming paradox simply means
Rumalo Munguia, Sr., who parlayed a Tory press
into a big print shop in Prospect Hill, has been
accepting duties and obligations of citizenship
minus the privileges such as voting. and so forth.
You can read English in fields.
He moved to San Antonio in 1926 as a political exile
after taking the losing de la Huerta side in the
struggle for power with the Obregon Calles
Morones group. He and his family lived through the
rough days of the Depression and stripped the
bottom of their barrel of resources. But as he
fought through it to his business success,
Munguia said he became convinced that the United
States is still a land of plenty of opportunity.
Born in . Born in Guadalajara, Munguia got
printer's ink in his blood as a young boy while
working as an apprentice in El Sol Print Shop.
He was in the thick of the revolution that broke out
in 1910 against the political and economic
oppression of Porfirio Díaz until 1920 when the de
la Huerta group split with Obregón. Munguil was in
the army as a public information officer setting
up newspapers throughout the Puebla zone. He was
named a delegate to the 1917 Constitutional
Convention but did not attend because he was on
active duty.
Bueno, eso es muy interesante. Sí, muy
interesante. Díganme un poco más sobre estos días
cuando usted salió de México. Cuando usted viene a
Texas, sí. ¿Cómo? ¿Cómo de qué? Pues más como sus
experiencias durante estos días. ¿Es una cosa de
peligroso o...? En 1926, cuando usted viene por
Texas. ¿Cuando yo vine? Sí. It was precisely
because Obregón was chasing me. And precisely the
night that I crossed the border here, that night
they looked for me in the house in Puebla to help me.
They only found my wife and some children. So if I
hadn't left Puebla the day I left, the next day they
would have shot me in front of the house, in the
Cerro de Guadalupe, in Puebla.
So I arrived here precisely on the day of my saint,
on the 11th of January, I came here in 1926, so if
they had arrested me there, on the day of my death, I
would have been executed. So that's when I started
working here at the press. And your wife, how did
she come to you? In October, I got the passports
because I was already settled here, I already had
my job. So I gave permission to the government to
let me come. Yes. And there are no problems with the
passport? No. So we didn't have any problems. And
since then my wife came with Rafael, Rubén,
Guillermo and Ylvira. They were the four children
who came from there. The others were born here.
Where are you from? Where in Mexico are you from?
From Puebla. From Puebla? From Puebla. Did you
meet her after you went to Puebla? Yes, when I
arrived in Puebla with the revolution, that's
where I met her. Yes. That's where I met her.
Because she... When we went to Puebla, the country
was more or less still. It was when the Constituent
Congress was held in 1917. I was also the first
councilor of the town hall and I was the director of
the public welfare.
until the mission of Obregón arrived and I had to
come. Since then I have been fighting here. The
first job, after I left the press, was when I
started my social work, we could go here. And then
we established the first school in the summer, in
Spanish, for children to speak Spanish. Yes. At
the Navarro School. Yes. Here in... It was here on
Fecos Street. There, during the holidays, we had
Spanish schools. That's nice. Yes. That's how we
started. Then, after I started working, por
establecer la biblioteca mexicana. Y logramos
que se estableciera la biblioteca. Mandó a México
algunos ejemplares y aquí se fue haciendo. Pero la
cuestión política y las intrigas en las
organizaciones siempre, ¿verdad?
Se murió, podríamos decir, se clausuró la
biblioteca. Y entonces pensamos en otra forma y
establecimos los cursos de extensión
universitaria de acuerdo con la Universidad de
México. Todo eso pues lo tengo en archivo,
¿verdad? Y fue por el año de 19... In 1940, we
started little by little in a school, then in
another school, the superior, then Bracken
Ridge. From Bracken Ridge we went to Trinity, to
Trinity and here, until we managed to
definitively stay in Trinity.
Here it is, here it is. Ah, dos palabras. Uno de los
programas culturales
desarrollados durante el año 1963 fue el
presentado del 7 de julio por el doctor José San
Martín de la estación radio de Cusura que debía
EXTV. Sí. Sí. Yes, very interesting.
About 50 years of Mexican culture in San Antonio,
Texas. Excuse me, there's someone waiting for
you. Do you want me to tell them where you're here?
Yes, you can show them in. I guess it's my daughter.
Mi hija está aquí. Oh, do you want me to bring her up
here? Well, bring them both up here. That'd be fun.
¿Es bueno? ¿Quieres encontrar con mi hija? Yo
quiero... ¿Esto puede usted conservarla? ¿Es de
Trinity University? Sí. Precisamente cómo se
fundaron los cursos. Sí, sobre los cursos. Ah, sí.
Y este es el trabajo de usted. Sí. Sí, qué bonito.
Tell me a little more about your experience with
Mr. Lázaro Cárdenas, the one you invited to come
back to Mexico. Yes, Lázaro Cárdenas was a boy who
was also an apprentice of printing, like me. Yes,
yes. But then he came The revolution came and we all
separated. And we didn't see each other again. But
we brought the two of us. We were already created in
the same school. We already felt the desire for
improvement. He understood through the
profession of the peasants and I through the
industrial part. So we were separated, he by his
side and I by mine, without any contact. But when he
came to the presidency, the
director of the national newspaper, Froylan
Manjarrez, came in. And Froylan Manjarrez was
a... a journalist who became the governor of
Puebla, whom I initiated. I helped him to become a
constituent deputy, also, for Atlixco. So when he
came in, he got together with Cárdenas, So he
remembered me. And then he called me. And then I
told Prolán that he couldn't come. That he was
already settled. And that I was taking care of my
children. And that was the reason. That's how
things are. I didn't come back with a political
passion, but when Cárdenas came in for the first
time, I received him. I have all the photographs
that we took with him. I was with San Antonio all the
time. Then he went to Russia and he got along with
the communists. I didn't have any interest
anymore. I told them, I'm more or less settled, my
children are getting educated in a way that I don't
want to go back. And then I dedicated myself to
organizing here the festivals of May 5, September
16, all organized by me. From all that I have
photographs and data and everything. But it would
be a very long question for you to see the process,
right? Yes. But here you can see something of how it
was done until it was finally achieved, that the
university was established. I don't know if there
is any here.
Como les digo a ustedes, pues, tengo una casa.
Estas son las carátulas de los programas que...
Programa de fiestas patrias mexicanas.
Sí.
Sí, y también...
Mi ciudad madre, Guadalajara. Su familia, toda su
familia estaba de Guadalajara originalmente.
Sí. Qué interesante. And my daughter,
Mary Catherine.
Ah, this one is also very interesting. I want to
read it, yes. You can keep this one as an example.
What? You can keep it as an example. For you. Oh,
it's for me? Yes. Oh, well, thank you. But this one,
no. This one, no. No, yes. Well, thank you. In this
case, it is not necessary to read it.
Well, do you know Obregón? I don't know Obregón.
No? Never? No, never, because we were always on the
opposite side. Obregón was in the north, and I was
in Yucatán with the Barats. We were separated, but
personally I don't know him. And you met Mr.
Cárdenas. What kind of man was Mr. Cárdenas? Very
well-intentioned. The same as Zapata. Zapata was
such a good man. Very good that he was Zapata. He was
naturally down there. No, no se puede controlar
porque la revolución no se hace con gente decente.
Se hace con el pueblo.
Y tenemos que echar mano de lo malo para poder tener
gente. Porque con gente decente no se hace la
revolución.
But you knew Mr. Zapata? Yes, I knew him. I knew
Zapata, I knew his brother. I was in contact with
many Zapatista bosses. Then some Zapatista
bosses were with me. I was in contact with General
Domingo Arenas, who was one of the most addicted to
Zapata.
Yes, yes. Zapata was a
very good person. Well, during these years, from
1920 to 1926, what kind of work did you have in
Mexico? Since... After the revolution... I had my
newspaper. Ah, yes. It's called... It's called
The Liberal. Ah, yes. In Puebla? In Puebla. Yes.
He had a little organ.